# README for: Forest disturbance increases functional diversity but decreases phylogenetic diversity of an arboreal tropical ant community## Manuscript details### AuthorsPhilipp O. Hoenle, Nichola S. Plowmana, Pável Matos-Maraví, Francesco de Bello, Tom R. Bishop, Martin Libra, Cliffson Idigel, Maling Rimandai, Petr Klimes#### Corresponding authorsPhilipp Hoenle, Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Institute of Entomology, Department of Ecology, Branisovska 31/1160, 370 05 Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic. Email: <philipp. hoenle92@gmail.com>Petr Klimes, Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Institute of Entomology, Department of Ecology, Branisovska 31/1160, 370 05 Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic. Email: <peta.klimes@gmail.com>### AbstractTropical rainforest trees host a diverse arthropod fauna that can be characterized by their functional (FD) and phylogenetic diversity (PD). Human disturbance degrades tropical forests, often coinciding with species invasion and altered assembly that leads to a decrease in FD and PD. Tree habitats are thought to be particularly vulnerable, but rarely investigated.Here, we studied the effects of forest disturbance on an ecologically important invertebrate group, the ants, in a lowland rainforest in New Guinea. We compared an early successional disturbed plot (secondary forest) to an old-growth plot (primary forest) by exhaustively sampling their ant communities in a total of 852 trees.We expected that for each tree community (1) disturbance would decrease FD and PD in tree-dwelling ants, mediated through species invasion. (2) Disturbance would decrease ant trait variation due to a more homogeneous environment. (3) The main drivers behind these changes would be different contributions of true tree-nesting species and visiting species. We calculated FD and PD based on a species-level phylogeny and 10 ecomorphological traits. Furthermore, we assessed by data exclusion the influence of species which were not nesting in individual trees (visitors) or only nesting species (nesters), and of non-native species on FD and PD. Primary forests had higher ant species richness and PD than secondary forest. However, we consistently found increased FD in secondary forest. This pattern was robust even if we decoupled functional and phylogenetic signals, or if non-native ant species were excluded from the data. Visitors did not contribute strongly to FD, but they increased PD and their community weighted trait means often varied from nesters. Moreover, all community weighted trait means changed after forest disturbance. Our finding of contradictory FD and PD patterns highlights the importance of integrative measures of diversity. Our results indicate that the tree community trait diversity is not negatively affected, but possibly even enhanced by disturbance. Therefore, the functional diversity of arboreal ants is relatively robust compared between old-growth and young trees. However, further study with higher plot-replication is necessary to solidify and generalize our findings.## Project details In the associated R scripts, we compare the functional and phylogenetic diversity of two plots, one in primary and one secondary forest.We analyze the communities on two scales, the tree scale and the plot scale. The plot scale sums up all incidence across the two plots, while the tree scale treats each tree as independent communities.For a list of the species linked to the morphospecies code, please see the Supplement Table S1 in our paper.For the script to work, it is necessary to download the decouple functions by deBello et al (2017, Method in Ecology and Evolution): https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.12735 ### LicenseMIT### Associated .R files:- plot_scale: Script for analysis on plot scale- plot_scale_invasives_removed: Scripts for the plot scale with data removal of non-native species- tree_scale: Script the analysis on tree scale- tree_scale_invasives_removed: Script for the analysis on tree scale, with data removal of non-native speices### Associated .csv files:- traits.raw.csv: Contains raw trait measurements of ant individuals. Please see Supplement Table S2 in the main paper for more information.- env.csv: Environmental metadata, including TreeN: TreeNumber, ie. tree individual IDs; AntSPRichness: Ant species richness on that particular tree; DBH: diameter at breast height (cm); BA: basal area (cm2); Forest: Forest type, ie. either secondary or primary forest; TreeSpecies, TreeFamily, TreeGenus: taxonomic information about the tree; X coordinate: X coordinate of the tree in the specific plot; Y coordinate: Y coordinate of the tree in the specific plot; TreeHeight: height of the tree (m); Site: the locality of the plots, i.e. Wanang; Elevation: Elevation of the plot (m asl)- comm.csv: incidence matrix of all ants on each tree. Referred to as 'whole community' or 'all'- nestcomm.csv: incidence matrix of all nesting ant species on each tree, sometimes referred to as 'nesters'- fcomm.csv: incidence matrix of all visiting species, calculated as community - nesters. Referred to as 'visitors' or 'foragers'- newphylodist.csv: phylogenetic distance matrix with out groups removed.